# Assignment_1
Assignment 1
December 18, 2019
Damian Kamieniecki
CU-NYC-FIN-PT-12-2019-U-C
Assignment 1:

Betterment: A better way money is meant to be invested

Within the last two decades as technology, digitalization, wireless data sharing and communication has completely evolved and connected the entire planet as never before, we have seen substantial change and growth ripple through and shake up many industries, both old and new, and re-define the possibilities and capabilities previously offered and explored. One such industry has been the Financial Sector; banking, investing, monetary exchange, loan requests, asset management and transfer have all become far more technology centric in order to be more accessible with clients and customers, as well as more profitable and efficient. A company that has come out of this technological boom and can be considered a “new-comer” by the larger established firms and institutions is Betterment.

To put it simply, Betterment is an online investment company. Based in and established in New York in 2008 by Jon Stein, a Columbia Business School MBA graduate and Eli Broverman, and NYU School of Law graduate. The concept and testing phase for the company was conceptualized and rendered by Stein and his roommate Sean Owen. Sean Owen, a Google software engineer, started building the platform in 2008 using Java application and MySQL database on Apache Tomcat servers with an Adobe Flash and Flex front end design. To break down what that all means: Java is a general purpose programming language that is class based and object oriented and designed to have as little implementation dependencies as possible, its intended to let developers write once, run anywhere or that the code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need or recompilation. MySQL is an open source relational database management system, and Apache Tomcat is an open source implementation system.
The initial prototype and design was created by Steins then girlfriend, Polina Khentov, but as Stein began to face regulation associated with starting a Financial Company he began to negotiate to bring in Eli Broverman, who was then a securities lawyer he met over playing poker, as the co-founder.
The original concept was to offer financial advice online as an SEC-Registered investment advisor. They also decided to offer broker-dealer services to customers meaning having the capability to trade securities on the behalf of customers and clients. From 2008 to 2010 the founding team continued working to develop the platform for launch; in 2009 the company gained approval from FINRA for membership. The company was established as a Delaware Corporation due to the states status as a corporate haven: Delaware is the birthplace of over 50% publicly traded companies. Betterment Holdings was the name of the parent company that Betterment LLC and Betterment securities operated under.
The company was launched in June 2010 at the TechCrunch Disrupt NYC , and actually won the award of “Biggest New York Disruptor”. Within the first 24 hours the company had acquired 400 early customers and funding began to be conversed about between early investors. 
The Firm received series A round funding from Bessemer Venture Partners in December 2010, $105 million as provided to the firm. In October 2012, Menlo Ventures provided Series B funding along with Bessemer and Anthemis Group and valued the company at $700 Million. 

Betterments’ CEO states that the whole purpose of developing and launching his company was to help manage peoples financial lives so that they can ‘live better.’ His mission is to have a system out there available for the general public that manages and advocates money and investments throughout the clients’ life so that it results in ‘better outcomes’.  When the company first launched, Chris Sacca, a well known startup investor, had doubts about the company due to its simplicity and ease of use. This was the main challenge that Betterment was intended to tackle; to make investing and asset management far more available and intuitive. Betterment stated that traditional players in the industry made investing and money management more complicated and confusing than it needed to be, and to that their solution was to apply the philosophy “Is isn’t ought”, or that just because things are a way does not mean they ought to be that way. Steins understanding is that the financial system has been designed in a certain way that not necessarily is the best way it could be, or accomplishing what it is intended to. His approach was to bring strategic investment principals to an online platform that would allow clients better understanding and management of their accounts. His design and mission has proven to be successful with the company boasting the title of largest independent robo-advisor. 

Betterment states that their intended target market is beginner investors, retirees, young investors, individuals who are concerned with only having access to low minimums and smartphone users. They claim that their platform is a great place for those who are looking to start investing and want to learn more about how to manage their money. They also claim that their platform is an excellent resource for experienced investors. Betterment currently has 463,480 clients and over $16 billion in assets under management. 

	The company differentiates itself by focusing service wise on aspects such as commissions and fees, customer service, ease of use, tools and resources, investment options, and asset allocation. The technology the company uses is largely focused in artificial intelligence and computer algorithms that generate personalized advice and manage the clients portfolio in respect to the parameters and tolerances set by the client. This automation allows to eliminate the irrationality, stress, frustration and high fees out of investing. Though, Betterment claims that its key to success it not only a cold algorithm; its also that they are able to give fiduciary advice as well as provide some of the best customer service in the industry. Some of their key competitive advantages are their custom and automated restructuring asset allocation tax coordinated portfolios, socially responsible portfolios, Goldman Sachs smart beta portfolio, and financial advice packages. 

The domain that Betterment is within is the Robo-Advisory Financial Services sector; by definition they are a digital platform that provides automated, algorithm-driven financial planning services with little to no human supervision. The profile is set up online by means of an interactive background survey. Such services offer easy to set up accounts. Robust goal planning, account services, portfolio management, education, low fees, and security. Today most robo-advisiors put passive indexing strategies that are optimized using modern portfolio theory.  The major trend in the last several years was to create platforms that delivered services straight to the clients. Recent developing trends have been these robo-advisiors being able to execute more complicated tasks such as tax loss harvesting, investment selection, and retirement planning. The industry very rapidly grew with assets managed by robo-advisors hitting $60 billion year end of 2015 and projected to reach $2 trillion by 2020 and $7 trillion 2025. 

Other major companies within the domain are companies who already had a traditional infrastructure within the financial industry but adopted the technology to operate similar platforms, such as: Fidelity, Moran Stanly, and Goldman Sachs. Other newer companies founded after Betterments launch include: Wealthfront, Ellevest, SoFi, Blooom, Facet and Wealthsimple.  

The impact of this company has been quite substantial, to reiterate; Betterment is the largest robo-advisor with 463,480 clients and $16 billion in assets under management with the average account being around $30,000. Betterment gauges its success by saying that if a client assumes similar risk to that of a different advisor, their cumulative return is on average +69% higher than the return rate that of the average private client investor. 

Relative to their competition, Betterment is graded as being the best pick for taxable accounts. This means that if your investments are not IRA or Roth IRA centric Betterment is the best advisory for tax optimization for your investments. There is no account minimum, which is common for most robo-advisors, and there is a 0.25% management fee, which is also quite the industry standard. 

Betterment has been around for a little over 10 years, so it probably is not yet reached a plateau in terms of services and products it offers. One service and product that is not yet offered is Crypto Exchange. There are many skeptics and challengers to crypto currency because of its fairly recent inception and inability to be valuated like traditional currency. But the fact is that most of the world has adopted or utilized it in some way and though the environment in which crypto currently finds itself in most likely will change in the future it is wise for investment companies to be researching its applicability and how it can become a more stabilized and useful product for clients. This product would utilize block chain and encryption technologies, which still have great potential to become more secure and singular so ensure almost instant, accurate, and cost effective transfer of funds in between two parties. 
In short it can be stated that Betterment is a new player on the block whose influence has paved the way for many other up and coming investment firms. The company’s ability to integrate technology and digitalization to traditional investing strategies has proven to be successful with its base as its client’s numbers continues to grow. Because of what the company stands for, we can expect that participation in investing will continue to become more commonplace amongst those who previously would only have an active IRA account, and as more diversified and risk tolerant products come available for lower minimum clients which intern will hopefully continue to yield positive returns, we can say that Betterment will continue to accomplish its mission it initially set out to do. 
